README.md, before:


<img src="quartz-h2.jpeg" width="84" title="quartz-h2"/>

[![Generic badge](https://img.shields.io/badge/quartz--h2-v0.7-blue)](https://repo1.maven.org/maven2/io/github/ollls/quartz-h2_3/0.7/)
[![Generic badge](https://img.shields.io/badge/Hello%20World-template-red)](https://github.com/ollls/json-template-qh2)
[![Quality Gate Status](https://sonarcloud.io/api/project_badges/measure?project=ollls_quartz-h2&metric=alert_status)](https://sonarcloud.io/summary/new_code?id=ollls_quartz-h2)<br>

# Quick start
#### 1. Running server with git clone on the code base.
* Partial func based route: https://github.com/ollls/quartz-h2/blob/main/examples/IO/src/main/scala/Run.scala
* Tapir endpoints routes:  https://github.com/ollls/quartz-h2/blob/main/examples/STTP/src/main/scala/Run.scala
```
git clone https://github.com/ollls/quartz-h2.git
sbt IO/run
sbt TAPIR/run
sbt RIO/run
```
#### 2. To run "Hello World Template" (json-template-qh2) in docker use:
```
sbt assembly
docker build -t name:Dockerfile . 
docker run -p 8443:8443 -t name:Dockerfile
```

To see tapir based routing example in json-template-qh2
```
git checkout tapir
```

#### 3. One more example/template: https://github.com/ollls/quartz-h2-gptapi

#### 4. Server configuration guide/document is coming.

# Asynchronous Java NIO **http/2 TLS** packet streaming server/client.

Quartz-HTTP2 now supports Tapir server interpreter from https://tapir.softwaremill.com
```
"io.github.ollls" %% "tapir-quartz-h2" % "0.7"
```

TLS encryption implemented as scala CATS effects with ALPN h2 tag. Direct native translation of fs2 stream chunks into http2 packets, where http Request's data and http Response's data mapped directy to fs2 streams. Tested and optimized to produce highest possible TPS.(**120K TPS** on MacBook with h2load tool, see details below). Single java.util.concurrent.ForkJoinPool for JAVA NIO Socket Groups and for evalOn() with CATS Effects. Http/2 weights and dependency are not implemented, for performance reasons. <br><br>**Starting from 0.5.1 server supports http/1.1 connections as a fallback when TLS ALPN H2 tag not supported.For non TLS connections it will be a protocol of choice when no H2 upgrade or H2 Prior Knolwedge used**.

```
"io.github.ollls" %% "quartz-h2" % "0.7"
```
to start server example with IO
```
sbt IO/run
```
to start server example based on ReaderT[IO, Request, Respose] with ability to use Reader environment.
```
sbt RIO/run
```
Server code for IO and RIO routes:
* https://github.com/ollls/quartz-h2/blob/main/examples/IO/src/main/scala/Run.scala
* https://github.com/ollls/quartz-h2/blob/main/examples/RIO/src/main/scala/Run.scala


### Logging.

Use .../src/main/resources/logback-test.xml to tailor log ouput to your specific requirements.

Also you may use options to control logging level.
```
sbt "run --debug"
sbt "run --error"
sbt "run --off"
```


### Basic server.
```scala
package example
import cats.effect.{IO, IOApp, ExitCode}
import io.quartz.QuartzH2Server
import io.quartz.http2.model.Method._
import io.quartz.http2._
import io.quartz.http2.routes.HttpRouteIO
import io.quartz.http2.model.{Headers, Method, ContentType, Request, Response}

object MyApp extends IOApp {
  val R: HttpRouteIO = {
    case req @ GET -> Root / "headers" => IO(Response.Ok().asText(req.headers.printHeaders))
  }
  def run(args: List[String]): IO[ExitCode] =
    for {
      ctx <- QuartzH2Server.buildSSLContext("TLS", "keystore.jks", "password")
      exitCode <- new QuartzH2Server("localhost", 8443, 16000, ctx).startIO(R, sync = false)
    } yield (exitCode)
}
```

### Webfilter support with Either[Response, Request]. Provide filter as a parameter QuartzH2Server()
```scala
val filter: WebFilter = (request: Request) =>
  IO(
    Either.cond(
     !request.uri.getPath().startsWith("/private"),
     request.hdr("test_tid" -> "ABC123Z9292827"),
     Response.Error(StatusCode.Forbidden).asText("Denied: " + request.uri.getPath())
    )
 )    
```
### Plain text http/2 - h2c, 175K TPS with 20 streams and 32 connections.
```scala
  //ssl context null will switch to h2c plain text
  exitCode <- new QuartzH2Server("localhost", 8443, 16000, null).startIO(R, filter, sync = false)
```  
### Http multipart support.
```scala
  case req @ POST -> Root / "mpart" =>
      MultiPart.writeAll(req, HOME_DIR) *> IO(Response.Ok())
```
### Sync mode with Java Socket Api on blocking pool.
```scala
  exitCode <- new QuartzH2Server("localhost", 8443, 60000, ctx).startIO( R, sync = true)
```
### Simple file retrieval.
```scala
 case GET -> Root / StringVar(file) =>
      val FOLDER_PATH = "/Users/user000/web_root/"
      val FILE = s"$file"
      val BLOCK_SIZE = 16000
      for {
        jpath <- IO(new java.io.File(FOLDER_PATH + FILE))
        jstream <- IO.blocking(new java.io.FileInputStream(jpath))
      } yield (Response
        .Ok()
        .asStream(fs2.io.readInputStream(IO(jstream), BLOCK_SIZE, true))
        .contentType(ContentType.contentTypeFromFileName(FILE)))
      } 
```

### Simple CORS response.
```scala
    case req @ GET -> Root / "json" =>
      for {
        //_ <- IO.println(req.headers.printHeaders("\n"))
        json <- IO(
          writeToArray(
            User(
              name = "John",
              devices = Seq(Device(id = 2, model = "iPhone X"))
            )
          )
        )
      } yield (Response
        .Ok()
        .hdr("Access-Control-Allow-Origin" -> "*")
        .asStream(Stream.chunk(Chunk.array(json)))
        .contentType(JSON))
```

### Web site service.
```scala
    //your web site files in the folder "web" under web_root.    
    //browser path: https://localhost:8443/web/index.html
    case req @ GET -> "web" /: _ =>
      val FOLDER_PATH = "/Users/user000/web_root/"
      val BLOCK_SIZE = 16000
      for {
        reqPath <- IO(req.uri.getPath())
        jpath <- IO(new java.io.File(FOLDER_PATH + reqPath))
        jstream <- IO.blocking(new java.io.FileInputStream(jpath))
        fname <- IO(jpath.getName())
      } yield (Response
        .Ok()
        .asStream(fs2.io.readInputStream(IO(jstream), BLOCK_SIZE, true))
        .contentType(ContentType.contentTypeFromFileName(fname)))
  }
  ```
### Upload example.

POST https://localhost:8443/upload/op.jpeg
```scala
 case req@POST -> Root / "upload" /  StringVar(_) => 
    for {
        reqPath <- IO( Path( "/Users/user000/" + req.uri.getPath() ))
        u <- req.stream.through( Files[IO].writeAll( reqPath ) ).compile.drain
    } yield( Response.Ok().asText("OK"))
```


### Performance test tool.

https://nghttp2.org/documentation/h2load-howto.html
http2 spec compatibility tests: https://formulae.brew.sh/formula/h2spec


h2load -D10 -c62 -m30 -t2  https://localhost:8443/test
```
finished in 10.01s, 111220.90 req/s, 1.06MB/s
requests: 1112209 total, 1114069 started, 1112209 done, 1112209 succeeded, 0 failed, 0 errored, 0 timeout
status codes: 1112209 2xx, 0 3xx, 0 4xx, 0 5xx
traffic: 10.61MB (11125438) total, 1.06MB (1112209) headers (space savings 90.00%), 0B (0) data
                     min         max         mean         sd        +/- sd
time for request:      200us     97.10ms     12.79ms      5.35ms    73.18%
time for connect:    43.33ms    170.60ms    105.62ms     51.84ms    38.71%
time to 1st byte:    55.31ms    181.53ms    120.53ms     55.00ms    51.61%
req/s           :    1762.79     1837.34     1793.33       18.37    69.35%

```



### How to run h2spec:

Start server with "sbt IO/run"
./h2spec http2 -h localhost -p 8443 -t -k
You should get:

```
Finished in 1.4891 seconds
94 tests, 93 passed, 1 skipped, 0 failed
```
### How to run test cases:

```
sbt test
```

Commit message:

HTTP Ranged support on Tapir, related  info added

README.md, after:


<img src="quartz-h2.jpeg" width="84" title="quartz-h2"/>

[![Generic badge](https://img.shields.io/badge/quartz--h2-v0.7-blue)](https://repo1.maven.org/maven2/io/github/ollls/quartz-h2_3/0.7/)
[![Generic badge](https://img.shields.io/badge/Hello%20World-template-red)](https://github.com/ollls/json-template-qh2)
[![Quality Gate Status](https://sonarcloud.io/api/project_badges/measure?project=ollls_quartz-h2&metric=alert_status)](https://sonarcloud.io/summary/new_code?id=ollls_quartz-h2)<br>

# Quick start
#### 1. Running server with git clone on the code base.
* Partial func based route: https://github.com/ollls/quartz-h2/blob/main/examples/IO/src/main/scala/Run.scala
* Tapir endpoints routes:  https://github.com/ollls/quartz-h2/blob/main/examples/STTP/src/main/scala/Run.scala
```
git clone https://github.com/ollls/quartz-h2.git
sbt IO/run
sbt TAPIR/run   ( Try: https://localhost:8443/mp4safari - to test iPhone/Safari compatible ranged video streams with Tapir )
sbt RIO/run
```
#### 2. To run "Hello World Template" (json-template-qh2) in docker use:
```
sbt assembly
docker build -t name:Dockerfile . 
docker run -p 8443:8443 -t name:Dockerfile
```

To see tapir based routing example in json-template-qh2
```
git checkout tapir
```

#### 3. One more example/template: https://github.com/ollls/quartz-h2-gptapi

#### 4. Server configuration guide/document is coming.

# Asynchronous Java NIO **http/2 TLS** packet streaming server/client.

Quartz-HTTP2 now supports Tapir server interpreter from https://tapir.softwaremill.com
```
"io.github.ollls" %% "tapir-quartz-h2" % "0.7"
```

TLS encryption implemented as scala CATS effects with ALPN h2 tag. Direct native translation of fs2 stream chunks into http2 packets, where http Request's data and http Response's data mapped directy to fs2 streams. Tested and optimized to produce highest possible TPS.(**120K TPS** on MacBook with h2load tool, see details below). Single java.util.concurrent.ForkJoinPool for JAVA NIO Socket Groups and for evalOn() with CATS Effects. Http/2 weights and dependency are not implemented, for performance reasons. <br><br>**Starting from 0.5.1 server supports http/1.1 connections as a fallback when TLS ALPN H2 tag not supported.For non TLS connections it will be a protocol of choice when no H2 upgrade or H2 Prior Knolwedge used**.

```
"io.github.ollls" %% "quartz-h2" % "0.7"
```
to start server example with IO
```
sbt IO/run
```
to start server example based on ReaderT[IO, Request, Respose] with ability to use Reader environment.
```
sbt RIO/run
```
Server code for IO and RIO routes:
* https://github.com/ollls/quartz-h2/blob/main/examples/IO/src/main/scala/Run.scala
* https://github.com/ollls/quartz-h2/blob/main/examples/RIO/src/main/scala/Run.scala


### Logging.

Use .../src/main/resources/logback-test.xml to tailor log ouput to your specific requirements.

Also you may use options to control logging level.
```
sbt "run --debug"
sbt "run --error"
sbt "run --off"
```


### Basic server.
```scala
package example
import cats.effect.{IO, IOApp, ExitCode}
import io.quartz.QuartzH2Server
import io.quartz.http2.model.Method._
import io.quartz.http2._
import io.quartz.http2.routes.HttpRouteIO
import io.quartz.http2.model.{Headers, Method, ContentType, Request, Response}

object MyApp extends IOApp {
  val R: HttpRouteIO = {
    case req @ GET -> Root / "headers" => IO(Response.Ok().asText(req.headers.printHeaders))
  }
  def run(args: List[String]): IO[ExitCode] =
    for {
      ctx <- QuartzH2Server.buildSSLContext("TLS", "keystore.jks", "password")
      exitCode <- new QuartzH2Server("localhost", 8443, 16000, ctx).startIO(R, sync = false)
    } yield (exitCode)
}
```

### Webfilter support with Either[Response, Request]. Provide filter as a parameter QuartzH2Server()
```scala
val filter: WebFilter = (request: Request) =>
  IO(
    Either.cond(
     !request.uri.getPath().startsWith("/private"),
     request.hdr("test_tid" -> "ABC123Z9292827"),
     Response.Error(StatusCode.Forbidden).asText("Denied: " + request.uri.getPath())
    )
 )    
```
### Plain text http/2 - h2c, 175K TPS with 20 streams and 32 connections.
```scala
  //ssl context null will switch to h2c plain text
  exitCode <- new QuartzH2Server("localhost", 8443, 16000, null).startIO(R, filter, sync = false)
```  
### Http multipart support.
```scala
  case req @ POST -> Root / "mpart" =>
      MultiPart.writeAll(req, HOME_DIR) *> IO(Response.Ok())
```
### Sync mode with Java Socket Api on blocking pool.
```scala
  exitCode <- new QuartzH2Server("localhost", 8443, 60000, ctx).startIO( R, sync = true)
```
### Simple file retrieval.
```scala
 case GET -> Root / StringVar(file) =>
      val FOLDER_PATH = "/Users/user000/web_root/"
      val FILE = s"$file"
      val BLOCK_SIZE = 16000
      for {
        jpath <- IO(new java.io.File(FOLDER_PATH + FILE))
        jstream <- IO.blocking(new java.io.FileInputStream(jpath))
      } yield (Response
        .Ok()
        .asStream(fs2.io.readInputStream(IO(jstream), BLOCK_SIZE, true))
        .contentType(ContentType.contentTypeFromFileName(FILE)))
      } 
```

### Simple CORS response.
```scala
    case req @ GET -> Root / "json" =>
      for {
        //_ <- IO.println(req.headers.printHeaders("\n"))
        json <- IO(
          writeToArray(
            User(
              name = "John",
              devices = Seq(Device(id = 2, model = "iPhone X"))
            )
          )
        )
      } yield (Response
        .Ok()
        .hdr("Access-Control-Allow-Origin" -> "*")
        .asStream(Stream.chunk(Chunk.array(json)))
        .contentType(JSON))
```

### Web site service.
```scala
    //your web site files in the folder "web" under web_root.    
    //browser path: https://localhost:8443/web/index.html
    case req @ GET -> "web" /: _ =>
      val FOLDER_PATH = "/Users/user000/web_root/"
      val BLOCK_SIZE = 16000
      for {
        reqPath <- IO(req.uri.getPath())
        jpath <- IO(new java.io.File(FOLDER_PATH + reqPath))
        jstream <- IO.blocking(new java.io.FileInputStream(jpath))
        fname <- IO(jpath.getName())
      } yield (Response
        .Ok()
        .asStream(fs2.io.readInputStream(IO(jstream), BLOCK_SIZE, true))
        .contentType(ContentType.contentTypeFromFileName(fname)))
  }
  ```
### Upload example.

POST https://localhost:8443/upload/op.jpeg
```scala
 case req@POST -> Root / "upload" /  StringVar(_) => 
    for {
        reqPath <- IO( Path( "/Users/user000/" + req.uri.getPath() ))
        u <- req.stream.through( Files[IO].writeAll( reqPath ) ).compile.drain
    } yield( Response.Ok().asText("OK"))
```


### Performance test tool.

https://nghttp2.org/documentation/h2load-howto.html
http2 spec compatibility tests: https://formulae.brew.sh/formula/h2spec


h2load -D10 -c62 -m30 -t2  https://localhost:8443/test
```
finished in 10.01s, 111220.90 req/s, 1.06MB/s
requests: 1112209 total, 1114069 started, 1112209 done, 1112209 succeeded, 0 failed, 0 errored, 0 timeout
status codes: 1112209 2xx, 0 3xx, 0 4xx, 0 5xx
traffic: 10.61MB (11125438) total, 1.06MB (1112209) headers (space savings 90.00%), 0B (0) data
                     min         max         mean         sd        +/- sd
time for request:      200us     97.10ms     12.79ms      5.35ms    73.18%
time for connect:    43.33ms    170.60ms    105.62ms     51.84ms    38.71%
time to 1st byte:    55.31ms    181.53ms    120.53ms     55.00ms    51.61%
req/s           :    1762.79     1837.34     1793.33       18.37    69.35%

```



### How to run h2spec:

Start server with "sbt IO/run"
./h2spec http2 -h localhost -p 8443 -t -k
You should get:

```
Finished in 1.4891 seconds
94 tests, 93 passed, 1 skipped, 0 failed
```
### How to run test cases:

```
sbt test
```
